.TH rcd 1 "Jully 2026" Date "Remote command distribution"
.SH NAME
rcd - Remote command distribution
.SH SYNTAX
rcd -h path_to_host_file [-t timeout_in_sec] [--otp] [--login-failure-limit n]
.I [-colname value ...]
.br
rcd --man
.br
rcd --help
.SH DESCRIPTION
Can distribute IOS commands on multiple Cisco devices, upload/download a startup/running
configuration to/from Cisco devices or for performing device upgrade. These tasks can be
performed by SSH or Telnet protocols. Even thought this script was primarily created for
Cisco devices it can also be used for non Cisco devices (but I did not test it).
.P
rcd.py is a Python rewrite (using
.B pexpect
and
.B click)
of the original Tcl/Expect script
.B rcd.exp,
and is invoked as the
.B rcd
command once installed.
.P
Linux only. Runs natively on Linux and under WSL (Windows Subsystem for Linux); native Windows is not supported.
.SH OPTIONS
.IP -h
Define the name of a hostfile that contains hosts specific parameters such as device
IP address, transport protocol (ssh or telnet), login name or password. This information
will be used for connecting to a device. See the HOST FILE section. This is the only
mandatory command line option.
.IP -t
How long (in seconds) rcd will wait for connection establishment, or receiving expected
string from device. Default value is 30s. Large value could result in slow performance espcially
in case when some hosts are not accessible or wrong cfile definition. On the other hand very short
value could result in assumption that some operation did not finished correctly (for example ssh
key generation).
.IP --otp
Wait out the remainder of the current 30-second TOTP window before retrying a failed login.
Use this when the password source (see HOST FILE - password management) yields a one-time
token, so that a retried login does not reuse an already-expired code.
.IP --login-failure-limit
Maximum number of login attempts per device before it is skipped and rcd moves on to the
next host. Defaults to 2.
.IP --man
Show this man page and exit. Falls back to a plain-text pager on platforms without a
.B man
command (for example Windows).
.IP --help
Show built-in usage help and exit.
.IP "-colname value"
Any mandatory or user defined host file column (for example -ip, -login, -pass, -proto,
-cfile, or any custom column) can be supplied or overridden on the command line using a
"-colname value" pair. See HOST FILE and HOST FILE - USER DEFINED PARAMETERS for details.
.SH COMMAND DISTRIBUTION
Before any distribution process can be started, you have to create two files. The first file (a host file)
is a list of IP addresses where you intend to distribute configuration commands together with other
configuration parameters. The second file (a command file) is a list of commands you want to distribute.
Lines beginning with '#' characters are considered as remark.
.SS HOST FILE
.P
The first line of the host file which does not begin with '#' is called a parameter line. 
The parametr line represents names of parameters that are needed to successfully distribute
configuration commands to their destinations. The second and following lines represent values of the
parameters specified in the parameter line. Some parameter names are mandatory and their names must not be
changed. Others are user defined. Order of parameter names does not matter. Parametr names and their values
are comma separated list. Parameters which are defined within the parametr line can be also used as a command
line arguments with '-' prefix. Defined values in host file have precidence over command line values. If you
omit a value for specific parametr name (because it is same for all lines in the host file) you can use
command line option to provide the value.
.SS HOST FILE - MANDATORY PARAMETERS
.IP ip
ip address of remote device to which we want to distribute commands. It is possible to use range in any of the
ip address octets. For example 192.168.20-30.1-255. Fourth octect's range is changing faster than thirth, third is
changing faster that second and second octet's range is changing faster than the first. For our example you will get
following ip addresses:
.P
.nf
.B \t\t192.168.20.1, 192.168.20.2, 192.168.20.3, 192.168.20.4 ..... 192.168.20.255
.B \t\t192.168.21.1, 192.168.21.2, 192.168.21.3, 192.168.21.4 ..... 192.168.21.255
.B \t\t192.168.22.1, 192.168.22.2, 192.168.22.3, 192.168.22.4 ..... 192.168.22.255
.B \t\t.
.B \t\t.
.B \t\t192.168.30.1, 1921.68.30.2, 192.168.30.3, 192.168.30.4 ..... 192.168.30.255
.fi
.IP login 
A user login name. Used during SSH/Telnet authentication process.
.IP pass
A user password. Used during SSH/Telnet authentication process.
.IP proto
Define which protocol will be used for communication with device. You can choose either ssh or telnet.
.IP cfile
Define the command file containing a list of commands to be distributed.
.SS HOST FILE - USER DEFINED PARAMETERS
You can define as many parameters as you want. This parametrs can be then used as a variable in command file.
For example 'tftp' parametr name can define ip address of TFTP server to which you want to backup configuration
files.
.SS HOST FILE - EXAMPLE
\t
.P
.nf
------------------------ file name: hosts ---------------------------
.B #define list of switches to backup
.B ip,login,pass,enabpass,proto,tftp,cfile
.B 192.168.20.10,root,topsecret,topsecret,ssh,,./cisco.generic.backup
.B 192.168.10.55,root,topsecret,topsecret,ssh,,./cisco.generic.backup
------------------------- end of file -------------------------------
.fi

In the above example you can see that in the file 'hosts' threre are seven parameter names from which five are mandatory
and the rest is users defined (see COMMAND FILE section for how to use parameters in the command file). Line 1 is a remark
describing the purpose of the file. Line 2 define parameter line. Line 3 and 4 are values for line 2 parameters. Value for
the 'tftp' parameter is omitted and you must supply the value by means of command line parameter as shown in the following
example.
\t
.P
.B ./rcd.exp -h hosts -tftp 192.168.254.100

.SS HOST FILE - password management
There are several ways to provide passwords for the rcd script. The simplest method is to use the -pass argument and leave the password field empty in the host file. Note that a password specified in the host file takes priority over one provided via the -pass argument.
You can also place a clear-text password directly in the host file’s pass field, though this is less secure. Alternatively, you can put a filename in the pass field, and the script will read the password from that file.
For a more secure approach, you can use the Python keyring module to manage passwords. In this case, enter keyring:service in the pass field, where keyring is a keyword and service is the service name used by your password backend. To use this feature, install the keyring module with 'sudo pip install keyring' command.
You may also need to update the keyring_backend variable at the beginning of the script, unless you choose to rely on the default backend, keyring.backends.libsecret.Keyring, which stores all passwords encrypted in a local file (~/.local/share/keyrings/).
If the keyring entry holds a TOTP/OTP token, use the -\-otp command line option so that, after a
failed login, rcd waits out the remainder of the current 30-second window before fetching a fresh
token and retrying, rather than immediately retrying with an already-expired code.
Unfortunately, if you need to provide an enable password, it must be stored as clear text in the host file. To avoid this, you can use AAA authorization, which automatically places you in privileged mode.

.SS COMMAND FILE
The command file consists of two types of lines - 'what you expect' and 'send' lines. 
The first line is the what you expect line, which is string received from the device. The second line
is what you send to the device (send line). In the following example (see the first two lines),
the first line is the '.*>' which define what you expect to receive as
a response string when you log in to a pix device. You can use regular
expressions. '.*>' means that you expect anything following by '>' character. 
The second line define command that you want to send to an device. In our example
it is 'enable' command. Third and the following lines are yust what you saw in the
first two lines - what you expect/what you send - and so on. Strings beginning with '$' character
define variable. You can use host file parameters as a variable (for example: $tftp). If you use
regular expressions in command file you can also use parenthesses to define $1, $2-$n variable.
In the example bellow you can see that (\\w+) regular expression store pix hostname into $1 variable,
which in turn is used in 'write net $tftp:$1' command. Lines beginning with '#' are comments and are
ignored. A blank send line simply presses Enter, which is useful for accepting a device's default
prompt (for example when confirming 'copy startup tftp').
.SS COMMAND FILE - EXAMPLE
\t
.P
.nf
----------------------- file name: cisco.pix-------------------------
.B .*>
.B enable
.B Password:
.B $enabpass
.B (\ew+)#
.B write net $tftp:$1
.B .*#
.B logout
------------------------- end of file -------------------------------
.fi
.SS COMMAND FILE - REGULAR EXPRESSIONS
.IP .
Matches any character.
.IP *
Matches zero or more instances of the previous pattern item.
.IP +
Matches one or more instances of the previous pattern item.
.IP ?
Matches zero or one instances of the previous pattern item.
.IP ()
Groups a subpattern.
.IP |
Alternation.
.IP ^
Anchor the pattern to the beginning of the string. Only when first.
.IP $
Anchor the pattern to the end of the string. Only when last.
.IP \\\d
Digits.
.IP \\\w
Letters, digit, and underscore.
.IP \\\s
Space.
.P
The above list of regular expressions is only shortened list. You should consult other books for complete
list and explanation.
.SH LOOP / ENDLOOP
A
.B LOOP
block iterates the enclosed expect/send lines once per item in a pipe ('|') separated list
variable, without reconnecting to the device between iterations. The loop body follows the same
strict expect/send alternation as the rest of the command file. Loops may be nested. After
.B ENDLOOP
add an explicit expect line to catch the last iteration's output before the outer alternation
resumes.
.P
.B LOOP
takes two arguments: the name of the list variable to iterate over, and the name of the variable
that should hold the current item on each iteration.
.SS LOOP / ENDLOOP - EXAMPLE
\t
.P
.nf
----------------------- file name: cisco.multi-context ---------------
.B .*>
.B enable
.B [Pp]assword:
.B $enabpass
.B LOOP $contexts $ctx
.B .*#
.B changeto context $ctx
.B .*#
.B write mem
.B ENDLOOP
.B .*#
.B logout
------------------------- end of file ---------------------------------
.fi
\t
.P
Corresponding host file entry:
.B contexts = admin|dmz|inside
.SH DYNAMIC VARIABLES
Any host file variable value can be populated at runtime instead of being supplied statically, by
prefixing the value with
.B cmd:
in the host file. The variable is resolved silently the first time it is referenced in the command
file and cached for the rest of the session, so a given dynamic variable is only queried once per
device. Dynamic variables can be used in send lines, expect patterns, and as
.B LOOP
list variables.
.SS DYNAMIC VARIABLES - SYNTAX
.P
.B cmd:device_cmd1;ret_pattern1;device_cmd2;ret_pattern2;... [ | os_cmd1 | os_cmd2 ]
.P
Semicolons separate command/ret_pattern pairs sent/receive to/from the device: each command is sent, and the
following pattern (a Python regular expression) marks the end of that command's output. Multiple
pairs may be chained; their output is concatenated in order. The first " | " (space-pipe-space)
sequence separates the device part from an optional shell pipeline, which is passed to
.B /bin/sh
so further pipes, awk, grep, sed, etc. work normally. The resulting output lines are joined with
"|", making the variable directly usable as a
.B LOOP
list.
.SS DYNAMIC VARIABLES - EXAMPLES
\t
.P
.nf
.B contexts = cmd:changeto system;.*#;show run context;.*# | grep '^context' | awk '{print $2}'
.B intname  = cmd:show run interface;.*# | grep nameif | awk '{print $2}'
.fi
.SH INSTALLATION
Install directly from GitHub with pip, which pulls in the
.B click
and
.B pexpect
dependencies automatically:
.P
.B pip install git+https://github.com/zrgloom/rcd.git
.P
Add the
.B keyring
extra if you want 'keyring:'-based password storage (see HOST FILE - password management):
.P
.B pip install \(dqrcd[keyring] @ git+https://github.com/zrgloom/rcd.git\(dq
.P
This registers an
.B rcd
command on your PATH and installs this man page alongside it, so
.B rcd --man
always works. pip has no portable way to install the page into a system man directory, so
.B man rcd
will not work out of the box; to enable it on Linux/macOS run:
.P
.nf
.B sudo install -Dm644 man/man1/rcd.1 /usr/local/share/man/man1/rcd.1
.B sudo mandb
.fi
.SH USAGE NOTICE
You had better try your command file on a test device before you will apply it on
real devices. If you do not, you can finished with unreachable devices !!!
.SH BUGS AND SUGGESTIONS
I would appreciate if you could send me any bug report or suggestion
how to improve this script to the following e-mail address:
rotten@volny.cz.
.SH LICENSING
This program is free software, distributed under the terms of the MIT License. See the LICENSE
file distributed with this program for the full license text.

This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without
even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
